Updated the graph database concept page. (#35)
neo4j/docs-getting-started: modules/ROOT/pages/graphdb-concepts.adoc

:description: An introduction to graph database concepts.

[[graphdb-concepts]]
= Graph database concepts

Neo4j uses the property graph database model.
The basic concepts about the property graph database model are introduced in this section.

A graph data structure consists of *nodes* (discrete objects) that can be connected by *relationhips*.

.Concept of a graph structure.
=====
A graph with three nodes (the circles) and three relationships (the arrows).

image::graph_concept_three_nodes.svg[]
=====

The property graph database model that Neo4j implements:

* A *node* describes a discrete object.
* A *relationship* describes a connection between a _source node_ and a _target node_.
* A *relationship* will always have a direction (one direction).
* A *node* can have zero or more *labels* to define what kind of node it is.
* A *relationship* must have a *type* (one type) to define what type of relationship it is.

> * Nodes and relationships can contain *properties* (key-value pairs) that contain data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Nodes and relationships can have *properties* (key-value pairs) that contain data, which further describe them.
```

[NOTE]
====
In mathematics, graph theory is the study of graphs.

* Nodes are also refered as vertices or points in graph theory.
* Relationships are also refered as edges, links, or lines in graph theory.
====

[[graphdb-example-graph]]
== Example graph

The example graph shown below, introduces the basic concepts of the property graph:

.Example graph.
=====
image::graph_simple.svg[]
=====

.Cypher.
=====

> To create the example graph, use the Cypher clause `CREATE`.

Reviewer: I vote for Martin's sentence as it is in active voice instead of passive.

[source, cypher, role="noheader"]
-----
CREATE (:Person:Actor {name: 'Tom Hanks', born: 1956})-[:ACTED_IN {roles: ['Forrest']}]->(:Movie {title: 'Forrest Gump'})<-[:DIRECTED]-(:Person {name: 'Robert Zemeckis', born: 1951})
-----
=====

> .Cypher.

Reviewer 2: Not sure if this is necessary here as this section describes the basic graph database concepts, not the Cypher language.

Reviewer: Agree with Jessica, the Example 2. Example graph suffices here. I think we don't need to introduce the CREATE clauses as we still haven't spoken about the different concepts in detail.

=====
This Cypher query uses references to express the equivalent `CREATE` statement as the previous example.

[source, cypher, role="noheader"]
-----
CREATE
  (n1:Person:Actor {name: 'Tom Hanks', born: 1956}),
  (n2:Movie {title: 'Forrest Gump'}),
  (n3:Person {name: 'Robert Zemeckis', born: 1951}),
  (n1)-[:ACTED_IN {roles: ['Forrest']}]->(n2),
  (n3)-[:DIRECTED]->(n2)
-----
=====

[[graphdb-node]]
== Node

Nodes are often used to represent _entities_.

* A node can have zero or more *labels* to define what kind of node it is.

> * A node can contain properties (key-value pairs) that contain data.

Reviewer: Those two are the same as the ones above.

> The simplest possible graph is a single node and no relationships.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The simplest possible graph is a single node with no relationships.
```

> Consider the graph below, consisting of a single node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consider the following graph, consisting of a single node.
```

.Node.
=====
image::graph_single_node.svg[]

The node labels are:

* `Person`
* `Actor`

The properties are:

* `name: Tom Hanks`
* `born: 1956`

The node can be created with Cypher using the query:

[source, cypher, role="noheader"]
-----
CREATE (:Person:Actor {name: 'Tom Hanks', born: 1956})
-----
=====

[[graphdb-labels]]
== Node labels

> Labels are used to shape the domain by grouping nodes into sets where all nodes that have a certain label belongs to the same set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Labels are used to shape the domain by grouping nodes into sets where all nodes with a certain label belong to the same set.
```

For example, all nodes representing users could be labeled with the label `User`.
With that in place, you can ask Neo4j to perform operations only on your user nodes, such as finding all users with a given name.

Since labels can be added and removed during runtime, they can also be used to mark temporary states for nodes.
A `Suspended` label could be used to denote bank accounts that are suspended, and a `Seasonal` label can denote vegetables that are currently in season.

A node can have zero to many labels.

> In the example graph the node labels are `Person`, `Actor`, and `Movie`, which is one possible way of describing the data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the example graph, the node labels are `Person`, `Actor`, and `Movie`, which is one way of describing the data.
```

> But assume that we want to express different dimensions of the data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But assume that you want to express different dimensions of the data.
```

Reviewer 2: I'd remove the subject altogether and say instead:
_More labels can be added to express different dimensions of the data._

One way of doing that is to add more labels.

> Below is an example showing the use of multiple labels:

Reviewer: I would remove that sentence.

.Multiple labels.
=====
image::graphdb-simple-labels-multi.svg[role="middle"]
=====

[[graphdb-relationship]]
== Relationship

A relationship describes a directed connection between a _source node_ and a _target node_.
It is possible for a node to have a relationship to itself.

* A relationship must have a *type* (one type) to define what type of relationship it is.

> * A relationship can contain properties (key-value pairs) that contain data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A relationship can contain properties (key-value pairs), which further describe the relationship.
```

* A relationship always have a direction and are connecting a _source node_ and a _target node_.

Relationships organize nodes into structures, allowing a graph to resemble a list, a tree, a map, or a compound entity -- any of which may be combined into yet more complex, richly inter-connected structures.

.Relationship.
=====
image::graph_example_relationship.svg[]

The node type: `ACTED_IN`

The properties are:

* `roles: ['Forrest']`
* `performance: 5`

The `roles` property has an array value with a single item (`'Forrest'`) in it.

The relationship can be created with Cypher using the query:

[source, cypher, role="noheader"]
-----
CREATE ()-[:ACTED_IN {roles: ['Forrest'], performance: 5}]->() <1>
-----

> <1> Note that you must create or reference two nodes to be able to create a relationship.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that you must create or reference two nodes to be able to create a relationship.
```
Alternatively, use a [NOTE] instead.

=====

Relationships always have a direction.

> However, you only have to pay attention to the direction where it is useful.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, the direction can be disregarded where it is not useful.
```

> This means that there is no need to add duplicate relationships in the opposite direction unless it is needed in order to properly describe your use case.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This means that there is no need to add duplicate relationships in the opposite direction unless it is needed in order to properly describe the use case.
```

A node can have relationships to itself.

> If we want to express that `Tom Hanks` `KNOWS` himself, that would be expressed as:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To express that `Tom Hanks` `KNOWS` himself would be expressed as:
```

.Relationship to a single node.
=====
image::graphdb-nodes-and-rel-self.svg[role="middle"]
=====

[[graphdb-relationship-type]]
== Relationship type

A relationship must have exactly one relationship type.

Below is an `ACTED_IN` relationship, with the `Tom Hanks` node as the _source node_ and `Forrest Gump` as the _target node_.

.Relationsip type.
=====
image::graphdb-nodes-and-rel.svg[role="middle"]

Observe that the `Tom Hanks` node has an _outgoing_ relationship, while the `Forrest Gump` node has an _incoming_ relationship.
=====

[[graphdb-properties]]
== Properties

Properties are key-value pairs that are used for storing data on nodes and relationships.

> The value part of the property can hold different data types such as `number`, `string`, and `boolean`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The value part of the property can hold different data types, such as `number`, `string`, and `boolean`.
```

.Concept of a graph structure.
=====
A graph with three nodes (the circles) and three relationships (the arrows).

image::graph_concept_three_nodes.svg[]
=====

The Neo4j property graph database model consists of:

* *Nodes* describe entities (discrete objects) of a domain.
* *Nodes* can have zero or more *labels* to define (classify) what kind of nodes they are.
* *Relationships* describes a connection between a _source node_ and a _target node_.
* *Relationships* always has a direction (one direction).
* *Relationships* must have a *type* (one type) to define (classify) what type of relationship they are.
* Nodes and relationships can have *properties* (key-value pairs), which further describe them.

[NOTE]
====
In mathematics, graph theory is the study of graphs.

In graph therory:

* Nodes are also refered to as vertices or points.
* Relationships are also refered to as edges, links, or lines.
====

[[graphdb-example-graph]]
== Example graph

The example graph shown below, introduces the basic concepts of the property graph:

.Example graph.
=====
image::graph_simple.svg[]
=====

> .Cypher.

Reviewer 3: As this is the first mention of cypher on the page, it might be nice to give it a brief introduction, even if that is just a hald sentence to introduce it as the 'query language cypher'.

Author: The first page does that.

-----
CREATE (:Person:Actor {name: 'Tom Hanks', born: 1956})-[:ACTED_IN {roles: ['Forrest']}]->(:Movie {title: 'Forrest Gump'})<-[:DIRECTED]-(:Person {name: 'Robert Zemeckis', born: 1951})
-----
=====

//.Cypher.
//=====
//This Cypher query uses references to express the equivalent `CREATE` statement as the previous example.
//
//[source, cypher, role="noheader"]
//-----
//CREATE
//  (n1:Person:Actor {name: 'Tom Hanks', born: 1956}),
//  (n2:Movie {title: 'Forrest Gump'}),
//  (n3:Person {name: 'Robert Zemeckis', born: 1951}),
//  (n1)-[:ACTED_IN {roles: ['Forrest']}]->(n2),
//  (n3)-[:DIRECTED]->(n2)
//-----
//=====

[[graphdb-node]]
== Node

Nodes are used to represent _entities_ (discrete objects) of a domain.

The simplest possible graph is a single node with no relationships.
Consider the following graph, consisting of a single node.

.Node.
=====
image::graph_single_node.svg[]

The node labels are:

* `Person`
* `Actor`

The properties are:

* `name: Tom Hanks`
* `born: 1956`

The node can be created with Cypher using the query:

[source, cypher, role="noheader"]
-----
CREATE (:Person:Actor {name: 'Tom Hanks', born: 1956})
-----
=====

[[graphdb-labels]]
== Node labels

> Labels are used to shape the domain by grouping (classify) nodes into sets where all nodes with a certain label belong to the same set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Labels shape the domain by grouping (classifying) nodes into sets where all nodes with a certain label belong to the same set.
```

For example, all nodes representing users could be labeled with the label `User`.
With that in place, you can ask Neo4j to perform operations only on your user nodes, such as finding all users with a given name.

Since labels can be added and removed during runtime, they can also be used to mark temporary states for nodes.
A `Suspended` label could be used to denote bank accounts that are suspended, and a `Seasonal` label can denote vegetables that are currently in season.

A node can have zero to many labels.

In the example graph, the node labels, `Person`, `Actor`, and `Movie`, are used to describe (classify) the nodes.
More labels can be added to express different dimensions of the data.

The following graph shows the use of multiple labels.

.Multiple labels.
=====
image::graphdb-simple-labels-multi.svg[role="middle"]
=====

[[graphdb-relationship]]
== Relationship

A relationship describes how a connection between a _source node_ and a _target node_ are related.
It is possible for a node to have a relationship to itself.

> A relationship:

Reviewer 3: Not sure why type is bold but direction and properties are not.

Author: Because the relationship is all about (mostly) the type.

====
=====

Relationships always have a direction.
However, the direction can be disregarded where it is not useful.
This means that there is no need to add duplicate relationships in the opposite direction unless it is needed to describe the data model properly.

A node can have relationships to itself.
To express that `Tom Hanks` `KNOWS` himself would be expressed as:

.Relationship to a single node.
=====
image::graphdb-nodes-and-rel-self.svg[role="middle"]
=====

[[graphdb-relationship-type]]
== Relationship type

A relationship must have exactly one relationship type.

Below is an `ACTED_IN` relationship, with the `Tom Hanks` node as the _source node_ and `Forrest Gump` as the _target node_.

.Relationsip type.
=====
image::graphdb-nodes-and-rel.svg[role="middle"]

Observe that the `Tom Hanks` node has an _outgoing_ relationship, while the `Forrest Gump` node has an _incoming_ relationship.
=====

[[graphdb-properties]]
== Properties

Properties are key-value pairs that are used for storing data on nodes and relationships.

The value part of a property:

* Can hold different data types, such as `number`, `string`, or `boolean`.

> * Can hold a homogeneous list (array) containing for example strings, numbers, or boolean values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Can hold a homogeneous list (array) containing, for example, strings, numbers, or boolean values.
```

Traversing a graph means visiting nodes by following relationships according to some rules.
In most cases only a subset of the graph is visited.

.Path matching.
=====

> If we want to find out which movies Tom Hanks acted in according to our tiny example database, the traversal would start from the `Tom Hanks` node, follow any `ACTED_IN` relationships connected to the node, and end up with `Forrest Gump` as the result (see the dashed lines):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To find out which movies Tom Hanks acted in according to the tiny example database, the traversal would start from the `Tom Hanks` node, follow any `ACTED_IN` relationships connected to the node, and end up with `Forrest Gump` as the result (see the dashed lines):
```

[[graphdb-indexes]]
== Indexes

Indexes are used to increase performance.
To see examples of how to work with indexes, see xref::/cypher-intro/schema.adoc#cypher-intro-indexes[Using indexes].
For detailed descriptions of how to work with indexes in Cypher, see xref:4.4-preview@cypher-manual:ROOT:administration/indexes-for-full-text-search/index.adoc#administration-indexes-fulltext-search[Cypher Manual -> Indexes].

[[graphdb-constraints]]
== Constraints

Constraints are used to make sure that the data adheres to the rules of the domain.
To see examples of how to work with constraints, see xref::/cypher-intro/schema.adoc#cypher-intro-constraints[Using constraints].
For detailed descriptions of how to work with constraints in Cypher, see the xref:4.4-preview@cypher-manual:ROOT:constraints/index.adoc[Cypher manual -> Constraints].

[[graphdb-naming-conventions]]
== Naming conventions

> Node labels, relationship types and properties are case sensitive, meaning for example that the property `name` means something different than the property `Name`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Node labels, relationship types, and properties are case sensitive, meaning, for example, that the property `name` is different from the property `Name`.
```

> It is recommended to follow the naming conventions described in the following table:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following naming conventions are recommended:
```
